34123 tape
is running and the light is on. It says it's
recording.
This is September the 21st, and down in the Wells
Fargo Bank, and I have the pleasure and honor of
chatting with Dean Gage. We're going to begin
about his student experiences. Dean, to help a
newcomer understand who this person is, describe
your experience and all before you got to Texas
A&M. Where did you grow up? high school, what did
mom and dad do, and then where'd you go that first
year and so forth? Well, I was born and reared in the
hill country in a small town called San Saba. In
fact, my mom and dad still live there. I was the
first person from either one of my families, both
sides, to ever go to college or university. And I
must say that a lot of that probably was stimulated
when I was in about the sixth or seventh grade in
4-H. And I came to 4-H Roundup at A&M and got to see
the campus for the first time ever on a college or
university campus. I fortunately was a high point
individual in a contest I want to watch and we had a
terrific time here and through high school I
really tried to be a high achiever and make grades
enough that clearly I could go to college if I
wanted to. So I had already come down to A&M and made
the decision that I was going to study veterinary
medicine. And yet, we had a real financial need in
my family. I had already taken all the entrance
exams and had been assigned a dormitory and a
roommate. was ready to come and I got two
substantial scholarships one academic and the
other for leadership at Tarleton State
University. My family could not pass that kind of
financial benefit so I went to Tarleton my first
year and roomed with another guy that I knew was
going to come to A&M because he wanted to study
veterinary medicine and ironically we were both
state officers in the FFA. And knowing that A&M was
the only veterinary college and knowing that we
wanted to get here as soon as possible, we
transferred our sophomore year. So I arrived on
this campus in the fall of 1961 and began as a
student in pre-veterinary medicine at the time.
What did you, when you came, how did you get here and
what did you bring? I got here with probably one
suitcase and I didn't bring much of anything with
me because I didn't have hardly anything. I
brought a fan, I will tell you that, because that's
all we had in the dormitories were electric fans
and it was hot and all you could do is move air around
a little bit. And did you come in a car, hitchhike,
train? I did not have a car. So I had to ride with
other boys that were coming to A&M from my
hometown. Describe when you got to the campus, how
did you find where you needed to be next? How did you
find which dorm? Well, my first semester I lived in
Law Hall, and I still remember to this day the
assignment of that dormitory, and fortunately my
good buddy and I were rooming together, and I even
remember my laundry number, GX2095 of all things,
because students' laundry at that time was even
done on the campus and wrapped up in brown paper,
and you'd go to the laundry and pick it up. And it was
a real experience coming from a real small town.
How did you get assigned to law? Do you know? I don't
really recall. except through the student
housing department somehow. You were in the
corps? No, I was not in the corps because I
transferred with adequate number of hours and
knew that I was going to be going to veterinary
college and could receive the commission without
being in the corps. And secondly,
I knew that once I got into veterinary college, I
could not stay in the corps. because of the time
constraints and the demands that would be upon us.
I didn't know that option existed then. I did. If
you transferred with, I think, 30 hours or more, I
never took less than 18 hours a semester.
I'll never forget Law Hall. Describe it. Oh, man,
those rooms were just kind of like a concrete
cellar that was above ground with no air
circulation. And every time the train would come
down the tracks, we would know it. And it was a
community, though, within itself, because you
got to know everybody on your suite and your floor.
And, you know, it was typical dormitory life. How
did you and your transfer friends get assimilated
into Aggie traditions and activities? Well, I
think all of us had a pretty good background in what
that was, and it did not take long to just simply get
involved with campus life. You know, just being
associated with the other students in classes,
and we never missed Yale practice. We never missed
muster. We never missed Tuesday nights when we
honored those silver tabs. So we were a part of the
life just by our own election to be a part of it. And,
you know, it was only about 8,000 students then, so
you had a lot of friends who were already here. A lot
of my hometown buddies were already here, a lot of
them in the Corps.
Did anybody
come through the dorm trying to get y'all to do
anything or participate in anything? No, I don't
think they really had to. I think there was just
such a uh loyalty of the traditions that we wanted
to be a part of it so no one even really had to ask us
they probably would ask us not to come because we
were going to be there were their nickname was
there a nickname for you guys uh not that i remember
i know later on there was a nickname for the people
who lived in law and puryear but i don't recall that
we had any because let's see you didn't transfer
into the core So you didn't frog in. That wouldn't
work. And you weren't a day duck. No. What did you
all wear to class? Generally, we wore a lot of
Western wear back then because so many of my
classmates and me had mostly boots and either
Levi's or Wranglers and just regular sports
shirts. But we took pride in how we looked. And we,
you know, dressed up. There were no shorts. There
were no tank tops and really no T-shirts. We took
pride in how we looked. Plus, all of us who had the
plans to go to veterinary college knew that once we
entered veterinary college, we were going to be
wearing a tie and a dress shirt every day or medical
uniforms once we got there. Were there any
memorable courses you took that first year? Oh
yeah, there were several. I took one in physics
that was so memorable, mainly because of the
demeanor of the professor in there. I think he had
three shirts and maybe two ties and he wore them, it
seemed like, every other day. And he was
red-headed, and one of his ties was brown, the
other was orange, and it just kind of all was a part
of his esprit de corps. And he was one of these high
intellectuals that could really teach, but to
carry on a conversation sometimes is a little
difficult. And then I had Dr. Harris in history,
and he made it very interesting with some of his
stories, particularly about Guadalcanal, and a
lot of his antics preceded him before we got in
class with him. So in the pre-veterinary, those
were the two most memorable ones. I'll tell you one
that was memorable was biochemistry. It was a
tough course, but the reason it's memorable It was
over where the dairy lab was and we always got ice
cream either before after class free. No, we had to
pay for it and What describe that first year?
Describe a typical class days routine. What did
you? What time did you get up? What did you do?
Where? When? Well, we took heavy loads, and I had a
goal of getting into veterinary college in two
years. So that meant that I'd already had one year
with 36 or 37 transfer hours, and I wanted to
package into that second year, my first year here
at A&M, my sophomore year, as many hours as I could
to get the requirements completed so that i could
get in in two years so my days were very long because
i took 18 19 hours and i i thoroughly though did like
to take the early morning classes and i had most
eight hour i mean eight o'clock classes of a
morning And by the time you take that many hours,
you're pretty well filled up with lecture, and
then it's very heavy in the sciences, so I had a lot
of laboratories. I had organic chemistry,
biochemistry, all of that in the same time frame.
So the days were packed predominantly with either
lectures or labs, a few hours off in which that was
time to do the things you had to do, your laundry and
other parts. But I guarantee you we took time out
for football games, for Yale practice, for the
Aggie activities of the day. We never failed to
participate in those. But when it got to be 7
o'clock at night, I was studying. I was burning the
midnight oil. Where did you study? I
predominantly studied in my room. I was fortunate
to be a person that developed great study habits in
high school. And if I could get it quiet and I could
take my set of notes and take the book and go through
it and highlight it and mark it, I could memorize
things by going over it a couple of times. And I
studied mostly in the dormitory. So it was quiet
enough. It was quiet enough, mm-hmm. And you ate
in? Sebesa. Describe it. Oh, man, there were some
real food riots, and you can imagine what all
happened in Sebesa and food fights and, you know,
of course, terrific food there. And all the food
was labeled, as I'm sure many others have already
told you, and it was just a sight to behold with that
many thousand people in there together eating at
one time. What was your favorite Aggie food?
Oh, my. Probably chicken fried steak. Was there
one at the other end of the spectrum that you didn't
like? I did not like meatloaf, and to this day I
don't like meatloaf. What's the nickname for it? I
don't remember it. Oh, I don't either.
I don't remember what it was. And chicken flapjack
didn't have a nickname. Not that I know of, unless
it was cow or something. I think it was, I think most
of the time we had beef, it was called cow or bull. I
don't remember. And bull neck was... What was it?
Steak, wasn't it? Yeah, yeah. Bullneck was steak.
Yeah, bullneck was steak. And y'all didn't have
any routine at your table or anything like that?
No. You were civilian students. No, we mainly went
in. I'll tell you one other thing I remember about
my sophomore year. There were no computers, and
registration was quite a process because it was
held in Sabeasa. And it was every person for
themselves, and you know, you knew the reputation
of the different professors, so
you wanted to try to match your schedule to a
professor that had a good reputation. but you were
at the mercy you had a card with your schedule on it
and you had to work it out you had to work out the
courses you took you had to work out who the
professor would be and the times that you took
those so it is a real challenge and you'd go back and
forth and you know you'd also try to get the same
course schedule your buddies had so it was quite a
quite an ordeal remember to whom you turned for
advice to be sure you were taking the right course
yeah i do because uh The university did a good job
there. We had undergraduate advisors, and at that
time, if we were pre-vet, we actually had someone
in the veterinary college who was an advisor to us
on the courses that we took. Do you remember who
that was? I do not remember who mine was. But I do
remember that Dr. McMurray, Associate Dean for
Academic Affairs, helped almost every one of us.
Compare the rigor of the courses here that year
compared to the previous year at Tarleton? There
really was very little difference, which
surprised me. I was fortunate to have come from a
high school that had very, very high standards.
And I was so well prepared for my first year of
college that I sailed through it. I even had
organic chemistry in high school. And we could go
into chemistry 101, 102. I didn't even have to do
the experiments. I already knew the answers. And
my other classmates from my own high school, they
were all in the same boat. So it was rigorous, and
particularly the biologies. They were harder.
But we had great preparation, and it gave me great
preparation for here. Let's see, during that year
before vet school, in the dormitory, were there
any pranks or jokes or? When I was at Tarleton? Or
here? Somebody set a trash can on fire half the
time. There were water balloon fights. I don't
remember any specific big one. I tell you what,
most of us trying to get into veterinary college,
we had such a fear that if we got involved in
anything, that we might not get in. And at that
time, they only took 64 students, and they were
having about 600 applications. So we pretty well
walked a straight and narrow path. Now, there was
no formal organization of the pre-vets. No. There
was a prescribed pre-veterinary medical track,
but not like now where you have a biomedical
science degree. It was clearly different then.
We're still for a few minutes talking only about
your second year of college, first one here. What
did you assume were the rules of classroom
behavior here at A&M? It was clear that the
professor was keen of the classroom, and you gave
that professor utmost respect. You called the
professor, yes, sir, or if it was a lady, you called
them, yes, ma'am, or addressed them that way, sir
and ma'am, and yes, sir, yes, ma'am. You were in
class on time and in your seat. If not, you were
really afraid to walk in late. There was great
respect and complete discipline. You did not talk
in class. You paid attention. You took notes. But
at the same time, they were approachable. They
were friendly. They were helpful. And they had a
heart to see us learn. And they had, I think, a real
interest in what we were trying to pursue as a
degree. And that was really noted in some of the
tough courses. Organic chemistry, for one. most
of the organic chemistry professors had a
reputation of being tough and hard but at the same
time they were very fair and they were very helpful
and one of them and I will never forget this his name
was Rakoff and he had the reputation of and I had
him, of coming in and passing out a major exam and
telling you what his dog made on that exam. And I
made A's in organic, but the poor guy next to me, on
one of the exams, he passed it out, and he said his
dog made 48 on it, and the guy next to me made 24. And
it was tough, but it was fair. Did the MSC have any
role in that year in your life pattern? You'd be
surprised what I would say about the MSC because it
was quite small back then. The major thing it had,
one, it had the only telephones where you could
make long-distance phone calls. And secondly is
the only place I knew where you could go cash a
check. As far as the MSC programs, I really was not
involved in those simply because I didn't have
time and I was trying to get in in two years. And I
really devoted most of my time to trying to make the
highest grades I could. they
were at the Grove and and I'm trying to remember was
Guyon Hall still there in 61 I believe it was I don't
remember ever going to a movie in Guyon Hall but I
went to some movies over at the Grove what about you
go to campus theater much a few times and then we
went downtown brian to the old palace and queen and
and i'll tell you what to eat in this town you only
had a few
places other than a few places in northgate uh the
wormans downtown young bloods uh you went to
barbecue which was I think over kind of where the
Hilton Hotel is now. That was it. And the Texan was
the drive-in. Texan was the drive-in, and I got to
tell you one more. That was the Tasty Freeze. And
every night at 1030, we often would go in some of the
cars, we'd drive over the Tasty Freeze, and we
would get a Frito Pie, which was made by taking a bag
of Fritos, pouring cheese, onions, and stirring
it up into a Frito Pie. And that was it. The Frosted
Mugs.
Did you get involved in any campus religious
activities? I did at the Baptist Church College
Station.
But on Saturdays, I went to school church. I never
failed. It was one church
behind me.
It
was a veterinary
after church one day and asked me if I wanted a date
with his sister for the Arkansas football game.
And of course I didn't have a date and there were no
girls or very few girls here at the time and I said
sure. So that's where it's starting. Really? It
really is. Describe that weekend date then. Well,
actually I was already in veterinary college. I
was in my second year. That's all right. Go ahead.
And she was, of all places, the University of
Texas. But she had wanted to come to A&M but could
not come to A&M because girls were not allowed. But
her oldest brother was here and he arranged and
called her that, yeah, come on over. And she
brought a friend with her from the University of
Texas. And I had a roommate that needed a date. So we
were in the MSC lobby waiting on them to arrive on
Friday afternoon. And when she started walking
up, the two of them, I should say, I looked at both of
them and I said, I hope that that one on the right is
his sister because I didn't want to go with the
other one. And sure enough, it was. And it was a
wonderful time that we had together. Had you seen a
picture of her before? No, I had not. So I wasn't
sure. So we went to old Coach Norton's restaurant
Friday night and had dinner. And we just began to
hit it off. She stayed with the Heaton's, who was
registrar here. she had known their daughter at
University of Texas, Kathleen. So that's where
she stayed that night, and then the next day we went
to the football game, and I don't remember all that
we did, but we went to the football game. Of course,
A&M did not win. Did they score any touchdowns,
though? I don't think so. We almost were at point of
kissing on first downs back then. As a student, I
never saw a winning football season. Oh, that's
right. Never. the whole time I was a student here.
And only the year after I left, which would have
been the 67th football season, they won the
conference. So I never saw that until I came back
here as a faculty member. But did you kiss this girl
on that? I kissed her on the first night. On that
first date? I did. Do you remember among your
friends, of that era, do you remember hearing any
stories of inappropriate behavior of Aggies and
blind dates? No, never. Aggies were taught, and I
think that this is something that is very true of
the values that were inculcated in most Aggies and
are still coming predominantly from their homes
and families, that they were taught to respect
women and ladies. And I never heard of any of that at
all. I never saw any of it. Generalize about the
attitudes of the students at A&M that you think
they possessed at that time? I really think they
came with a tremendous conservative value system
that placed a high priority on God, family, and
country. Most of us at that time were offsprings of
World War II veterans. Not only World War II
veterans, but parents who lived through the
ending years of the Great Depression and the
enormous sacrifices that many of them made to be
able to send us to college. And we had probably such
a grateful heart for what our families and our
parents had provided us. We also came here with a
commitment that we would not let them down.
because we knew it was a sacrifice. And I can
remember, particularly when I got into
veterinary college my first year, that near the
end of the semester, every once in a while, I would
have to sell a textbook to have enough money to eat
for the rest of the semester. Do you remember what
that first year cost in round numbers? Oh, I have no
idea, but I'll tell you what I remember about
tuition in my freshman year. It was $40 a semester.
My first year here at A&M, everyone just went
berserk because it doubled to $80 a semester,
regardless of the number of hours that you took.
And I really don't recall it going up a great deal in
61, I mean in 62, but when I entered veterinary
college,
that was a little higher tuition rate. I don't
remember what that was. Did you have spending
money? And if so, where'd you get it? I had very
little spending money. Most of my spending money
was for food. And, you know, I had a little, and then
I got it predominantly from my mom and dad. I later,
when I was in veterinary college, worked at the
large animal hospital and was able to pick up a
little bit of money there. Now, before you made
that formal application to vet school, who did you
turn to for advice and counsel on how to do it? It was
pretty well prescribed by the dean's office in the
veterinary medical college. And then I had a dear
friend who was a former state congressman from San
Angelo named Penrose Metcalf. And he had helped
young men for probably 30, 40, 50 years. He was an
Aggie. And I had gotten to know him because of my
state leadership roles in high school. And he
seemed to pick out young men who were in leadership
roles in high school that he thought would make a
good student at A&M. And he really helped guide and
would tell me things I needed to do, particularly
not having parents that knew the ropes of what to do
in a college or university setting. And then
secondly, my hometown veterinarian gave me some
counsel and advice on some certain things to do.
And then I just was fortunate to have high enough
grades that I was one of the first 13 to get letters
out of that 64 selected in that class. Do you
remember what your GPA was? It was a 3.8. 3.8. Other
than the paper application, what else was
involved in the process of selection? Well, I was
fortunate because at that time, They would take
the first few highest ones based upon what their
academic performance was, what their grades were
in the hard science courses, the biologies, the
physics, the organic. And secondly, they looked
at what your leadership had been. And I had a pretty
substantial resume of leadership, even my first
year at Tarleton. I was elected president of the
student FFA chapter up there. I'd been on the
collegiate livestock judging team and had some
other position of leadership. So that was part of
my resume coming to it. I didn't even have to have an
interview. Now, when they got to about the last
half of that class of 64, then they did do
interviews. And, of course, now they interview
every student. How did you learn you'd been
selected? I'll never forget this. Everyone was
waiting. We'd heard the letters were going to come
out. I had gone home for the weekend and I came back
and the first thing I did when I got back on campus
was to go to the post office at Northgate and open my
mailbox and there was the letter from Dean Price.
And you can imagine I probably didn't take more
than 10 steps jumping all the way to the MSC to call
my mom and dad. I still have that letter to this day.
And that was about when in the spring? That would
have been probably about April of the spring
semester. Of course, that was contingent upon
successful completion of the courses I was
enrolled in. And what did you do that summer? I went
back home and worked. On the farm? On the farm and
ranch. Helped my dad, which I had done every
summer.